---
layout: post
title: What’s Wrong With HP?
date: 2016-11-07
category: HP
---

![fissioning HP][1]
What is wrong with HP that would spur its announced fission into two daughter
companies? My view from the technology trenches is different from what I am
reading in the business press.

HP is not really a technology company any more. It is a logistics and marketing
company. Much of its engineering is outsourced. I am not surprised that it is
splitting itself according to its go-to-market and channel criteria, not
technology criteria.

HP does not know how to innovate. Instead of letting a thousand flowers bloom
and leaving itself open to positive black swans, it doubles down on big bets.
When I was at HP Labs, we were encouraged to only propose projects that promised
a billion dollars or more in revenue. There was no room for the small
speculative project.

Software is eating the world, but HP cannot write software. It is even confused
at the word “software”, using it as the name of a division that is just 10% of
the company, even though software is actually crucial in every one of is
divisions. HP’s software development is incredibly fragmented, with no returns
to scale. Each of its many software development groups scattered throughout the
company have their own idiosyncratic software engineering practices, some good
some bad. The code of each development group is walled off from other groups, so
code sharing across the company is rare. Managers regard access to their
organization’s code as a weapon to use in internal battles and negotiations.

HP cannot attract and keep good software engineers. For example, I personally
know 24 other engineers who, like me, have made the migration from HP Labs to
Google over the years, and there are probably many more. In contrast I don’t
know a single person who has moved in the reverse direction from Google to HP.
Some of this is no doubt driven by superior remuneration and perks, but I think
what really clinches the deal is that in a real technology company what the
engineers do really matters. For that they are willing to tolerate the packed
elbow-to-elbow work areas and the straitjacket of a company-wide unified
software development process.

Maybe HP does need to split, so that at least one part of it has some chance of
turning itself back into a real tech company. I wish my friends still there all
the best as they navigate the transition.

[1]: /img/1_9JTWGej6L6qab8STaaK16g.jpeg